---
layout: basic
title: Academia
ad_free: true
---
## Academia ##

I am currently working towards a <em>philosophi&aelig; doctor</em> in <a
    href="http://www.cse.wustl.edu/">Computer Science</a> at <a
    href="http://www.wustl.edu/">Washington University in Saint Louis</a>
under the guidance of <a href="http://arl.wustl.edu/~pcrowley/">Dr. Patrick
    Crowley</a>.  Previously, I received my Bachelor of Science in
Mathematics and Computer science from <a
    href="http://www.mu.edu/">Marquette University</a>.  After which I took
an opportunity to work with <a href="http://www.mscs.mu.edu/~brylow/">Dr.
    Dennis Brylow</a>, as a research assistant for the <a
    href="http://xinu.mscs.mu.edu/">Systems Laboratory</a>, during which
time I received my Master of Science in Computer Science.

### Teaching ###
    
* Assistant, Fall 2010, [CSE 361S: Introduction to Systems
Software](http://arl.wustl.edu/~pcrowley/cse/361/index.html)

### Research ###

#### Research at Washington University ####

I am currently a research assistant for Dr. Patrick Crowley at Washington
University in Saint Louis.  As such, I have effectively become a member of
the <a href="http://arl.wustl.edu/">Applied Research Lab</a> (ARL), which
largely deals with network infrastructure and dealing with high-speed
network tasks.

At present, my specific research is developing a ``Passive Network
Appliance'' (PNA) that allows network administrators to closely monitor
network traffic while providing line-speed (or near line-speed) detection
of malicious content.

#### Research at Marquette ####

As a graduate student, I was offered a research assistantship to work in
the systems laboratory under <a href="http://www.mscs.mu.edu/~brylow/">Dr.
    Dennis Brylow</a>.  The lab is largely focused around projects using <a
    href="http://xinu.mscs.mu.edu/">Embedded Xinu</a>&mdash;a small,
stable, easy-to-use operating system.

This laboratory concentrates on embedded, real-time, and interrupt-driven
systems.  My master's thesis focuses on exploring how software
transactional memory (STM) will work in an interrupt-driven system.  In
theory, by using STM we would be able to reduce jitter in the handling of
interrupt since global structures would be lock-free.

Another goal of Embedded Xinu is to present a simple to understand O/S for
teaching undergraduate and graduate students about operating system
concepts.  Having been taught operating systems by implementing various
parts of Xinu, I believe this is useful as pedagogical tool.  As such, one
of the constant goals is to keep Xinu easy to understand.

* Michael J. Schultz. <a href="files/thesis-2009.pdf">Using Software
    Transactional Memory in Interrupt-Driven Systems</a> (<a
    href="files/thesis-present.pdf">presentation</a>).  Master's Thesis,
Marquette University, August 2009.
* Michael J. Schultz and Dennis Brylow.  ``Adding Software Transactions to
the Kernel'' (<a href="files/lctes2008-schultz.pdf">abstract</a>, <a
    href="files/lctes2008-schultz_poster.pdf">poster</a>). Student Poster
Presentation at the <em>Conference on Languages, Compilers, and Tools for
    Embedded Systems</em>, Tuscon, Arizona, June 2008.

### Side Projects ###

At Marquette I, and others, helped <a
    href="http://www.mscs.mu.edu/~cstruble/">Dr. Craig Struble</a> develop
and build ``<a
    href="http://www.mscs.mu.edu/~cstruble/slayer/">slayer</a>.'' This
system is a small (sixteen core) beowulf cluster computer.  Photos are
available on Dr. Struble's web site.

Additionally, I was an active member of Marquette's <a
    href="http://mulug.mscs.mu.edu/">Linux Users Group</a> and <a
    href="http://www.mscs.mu.edu/~acm/">Student ACM Chapter</a>.  I also
took on (and still perform as) the role of system administrator for the
Linux Users Group server.
