--- 
layout: post
title: ./configure --enable-study-mode
---
Well, I'm currently running under the assumption that I have a math test
tomorrow.  Therefore I should be studying, correct?  I assure you I'll get
to the point of studying soon.  First, however, I want to explain to you
how I went from reading notes about birth-and-death processes to updating
the ports collection on my FreeBSD box (it won't take long).

So, I begin reading my notes from the beginning of the semester.  Nothing
looks too bad and I get to the third page in short time, then I start
reading about birth-and-death processes.  Nothing special, but it does mean
a significant change in topics so I decide to take a brief mental break to
check my email.  No new messages.  Back to studying.  Wait, I want to start
some music---great idea!  Let me just load up iTunes.  Hmmm, I've already
listened to most of this.  I know I have some more music on my file server
but how to get it to my laptop...?

Well, the easy way would be to copy over the files using something like
[scp](http://www.wikipedia.org/wiki/Secure_copy "Secure Copy) but I don't
want to use more disk space on my (already too full) laptop.  Ok, I do have
NFS set up so I can just mount the music directory and play it over the
network.  Nah, UDP traffic is for wimps besides it would leave ugly links
in iTunes when I leave my network tomorrow.  Thinking a few more seconds I
realize I want to mount the music directory as if it were someone sharing
their iTunes with me.  How hard could that be for FreeBSD?

A quick Google brings up the [Firefly Media
Server](http://wiki.fireflymediaserver.org/FrontPage) that claims  to have
exactly what I'm looking for.  I just need to `cd /usr/ports/audio/mt-daapd
&& make install`.  D'oh!  There is a vulnerability, I need to update the
ports tree.  So here I am, instead of studying I'm sitting here updating
the FreeBSD ports tree.  Then I get to build mt-daapd, configure it, and
hope that iTunes recognizes it so I can study.
